   Michael,

   This is draft for a blog entry that I plan to write on Medium.

   I stepped back from writing this week took time to gain a few insights
that will influence my course of action.

Reread Limitations  https://blog.keras.io/the-limitations-of-deep-learning.html

1. The complex geometric transformations that Deep Learning derives are still far
    away from meaningful knowledge representations that can be reasoned with.
    I had expected more, but realize now that I had allowed myself to be caught in
    a wave of wishful thinking. I appreciate that Limitations hit me with the cold bucket
    of water that I needed.

Read chapter 7 Regularization for Deep Learning in from the Deep Learning Book

2. Was amazed at the shear amount of processing involved and I reflected on the
    the over processing we did for 3D seismic at TI in 78, The effort to wring signal
    from lots of data is staggering and not for the feint of heart especially with the
    demands for skilled Data Scientists to set hyper parameters.

Watched a Ray  Kurzweil video from 2014

3. All that he presented was volume and velocity. How anybody can stand up
    with a lack of convincing arguments is beyond me. The king of Futurists is
    one of may pompous asses who think they can get away with pawning off
    unsubstantiated conclusions on the public to make themselves feel important
    and make money posing as experts.

Reviewed the writing of a number of respected Machine Learning researchers.

4. My feeling is that they are not the source of the AI hype. If anything they come
    off as voice of reason. I sense that the hype is coming from Futurists and other
    wannabees feeding contrived opinions to journalists who are drawn to sensational
   stories like a moth to the flame. It is not software or data that is eating the world.
   It is cascading hype.

On Twitter I received a number of Tweets from people freaked out about the Facebook
computers making up their own language

5. This was great opportunity to gauge the public's perception. My immediate insight
    is simple. The Facebook computers had no objective functions to constrain them to
    the English language. Therefore the Facebook computers hatched no conspiracy to
    detach from humans to begin taking over the world.

6. Too much effort is being directed towards social media images, enhancing advertising
    and recommender systems. My derogatory term for all this money making but poor use
    of technology is "Click Baiting"

-----------------------------------------------

So what interpretation have I made from these insights?

1. Deep Learning is a big advance in patterns, but not knowledge representations.

2. AI is as far away from Knowledge or my Practices as ever.

3. Almost no one has a clue of Emergence is or how it works. However unwittingly
    people are invoking Emergence when assuming that computers will achieve
    conscientiousness.

4. All humans are predisposed to anthropomorphizing. Our conscienceless
    leverages anthropomorphization to establish a frame of reference that make
    us human. This provides a rich subjective reality, but AI and programming itself requires
    an objective reality. It takes constant self examination and vigilance to achieve this.

5, Super Intelligence to me has become a bigger joke than ever.

-----------------------------------------------

 Course Of Action

The lack of a knowledge representation, complex processing, futuristic hype,
public perception and Click Baiting have convinced me that my best course
of action is to work harder on Humanistic Practices and place less of a priority
on Machine Learning.

The Augment Plane has already provided me with many benefits:

1. It provides a bridge for Information to Knowledge traversal that
    strengthens both.

2 It provides a buffer for Machine Learning that allows one to embrace it
   while keeping the hype at arms length.

3. It puts Machine Learning and not Data Science in an ontological
    straight jacket.

4. I recognize that I have a lot more explaining to do so I am even more
    committed to writing.

5. Machine Learning was looming over me like a shadow, so I had to
    metaphorically wrestle it to the ground.

---------------------------------

I can view Data Science again with the larger context of a profession.

There is a lot of good solid work to be done in Data Science for informing people.

As a profession Data Science has a future where AI does not.


Tom








