

Execution Uncertainty

    Does the sequence of actions of the actors, from the environment’s initial state,
    always lead to the same final state?

    Fully deterministic. There is no noise in the rules of the game; if the two players take
    the same sequence of actions, the states along the way will always be the same.

Observational Uncertainty 

    Do actors have complete information of the environment?

    Fully observed. Each player has complete information and there are no hidden variables.
    For example, Texas hold’em does not satisfy this property because you cannot see the cards
    of the other player.

Duration Uncertainty

    Do the actors know how long the activity will last?

    Each episode/game is relatively short, of approximately 200 actions.
    This is a relatively short time horizon compared to other RL settings which may involve
    thousands (or more) of actions per episode.


Action Uncertainty 

    Are the effects of the actor’s actions known exactly?

    The action space is discrete. a number of unique moves are available.
    In contrast, in robotics you might want to instead emit continuous-valued torques at each joint.

    We have access to a perfect simulator (the game itself), so the effects of any action are known exactly.
    This is a strong assumption that AlphaGo relies on quite strongly, but is also quite
    rare in other real-world problems.


Evaluation Uncertainty

    Is there an evaluation criteria to measure the successful completion of the activity?

    The evaluation is clear, fast and allows a lot of trial-and-error experience.
    In other words, the agent can experience winning/losing millions of times,
    which allows is to learn, slowly but surely, as is common with deep neural network optimization.

Solution Uncertainty

   Is there knowledge of previous solutions that can be used as a guidance to the successful completion?

   There are huge datasets of human play game data available to bootstrap the learning,
   so AlphaGo doesn’t have to start from scratch.



