

Date:  December 1st, 2015
Place: Global – Virtual
Contestant Requirements: Free and open to all.
Prizes (USD)

1st Prize $10,000

Additional prizes to be determined.

Summary:  The Data Science Association and Big Data in Denver (a LinkedIn Group) are holding a global virtual Machine Learning Contest.
The goal is to demonstrate how data science and data engineering can improve our decisions and the quality of life to the public.

Contestants will compete to create the best mobile phone app and/or website to be made free to the public to make best
possible ski venue and route/time decision to get to the ski slopes.  Any variety of data sources and data science
techniques may be used.  A panel of judges shall award prizes for the best solutions. Contestant data sources and
techniques shall be published on the website for others to review and learn at the conclusion of the contest.

ontestants may compete alone or with others yet only one prize will be awarded per registered contestant.
Contestants must register with their real name and provide proof of identity to be eligible to receive a prize.
Proof shall consist of a government issued birth certificate and government issued passport with picture.
Contestants must produce a workable and reliable mobile app providing key (near) real-time weather, snow and traffic
information for the Colorado public to make the best possible ski venue and route/time decision to get to the Colorado ski slopes.
The mobile app must be workable and reliable on all versions of the following mobile operating systems:

    Apple iOS
    Android
    BlackBerry OS

The mobile app must provide users with the following key (near) real-time data in an easy-to-understand user-interface:

    Weather data for Colorado mountains within 45 minutes
    Snow conditions at all Colorado ski resorts within 45 minutes
    Snow conditions in Colorado mountains within 45 minutes
    Traffic information for major Colorado highways, ski access roads and mountain passes within 45 minutes

Contestants may use any and all compute tools, code, techniques and methods to produce the best app (must be disclosed at contest conclusion).
Contestants are responsible for providing own compute power, code, tools and techniques.
Contestants may use any and all data sources (must be disclosed at contest conclusion).
Contestants must provide the final mobile app to the panel of judges on or before Friday November 20, 2015.
First place winner of the Machine Learning Contest will receive USD $10,000.
Additional prizes will be determined by the Machine Learning Contest organizers.
Contestants agree to follow all laws.
Contestants agree to transfer any and all mobile app ownership rights to contest organizers.
Contestant must receive the award personally and not via a third party and must provide proof of identity
(government issued birth certificate and government issued passport).
Contestants must provide a working telephone number and be available, either in-person at Level 3 Communications
in Colorado or via provided telephone number answered in-person to receive an award during the contest award ceremony
on December 5, 2015 from 4:00pm to 7:00pm Mountain Standard Time.

---------------------------------

Contestants may use any data sources they choose to create the best solution (must be disclosed at conclusion).

Traffic Patterns

    Colorado Traffic Data Explorer
    Colorado Road Condition Data
    Colorado Dept. of Transportation Traffic Data

Select the Business Center option at the top of the page, and scroll down to Statistics, Maps & Data.  After the new page opens, select the Traffic Data tab.

There are three search options on the right side of the Map:

·         Search by City/County

·         Search by Highway Segment

·         Search by Traffic Station

Since you’re looking for Daily traffic counts by Route, I would select Search by Highway Segment, and use theCDOT Route Number drop down box.

Under the map there are four options available Stations, AADT, Future Traffic and ESAL. The information you need is most likely under the Stations Tab.

Highlight the Station you want data from, and go to the bottom of the page. There are three data options available Daily, Monthly Summaries and Annual.

Weather

    Colorado – State Data – National Weather Service
    Colorado Climate Center – Data Access
    Colorado Weather History

Snow Conditions

    Colorado Snow Forecasts
    Colorado SnowPack Data
    Variety of Data Sets
    National Snow Data
    Average Annual Snowfall in Colorado

